So hi and welcome to session 606,
Direct to Java Client.
My name is Andreas Wendker.
I'm still the manager of the
WebObjects rapid development team.
And before I dive into
Direct to Java Client,
I'd like to quickly summarize
what Java Client is.
So who is seeing session
number 609 this morning?
Okay, thank you.
So, most of the content of the session
will be based on the session 609,
but if you missed it,
I don't think there was too
much information that you
will get lost this time.
So Java Client is a technology for
creating three-tier desktop applications.
The client process displays the user
interface and interacts with the user.
The server is a WebObjects
application server and it accesses
the database and the database,
the third tier, stores the data.
The important pieces of information
are that the client never
accesses the database directly.
It always goes through the server.
So the server has full control
over the access that the
client has to the database.
And the other interesting
information is that Java Client uses
HTTP as the standard communication
protocol between client and server.
So you get the connectivity
of an HTML-based application,
but you get a much richer user interface.
Java Client uses the
Java Foundation classes,
or Swing, as the widget layer.
So it's basically platform independent.
It just requires JDK 1.3.
Java Client is localizable.
I actually forgot to talk
about this this morning.
But if you do localization,
you do it the same way as with Cocoa.
So you have multiple
versions of your files,
like multiple interface files,
and you just give them special extensions
like mine is German or mine is English,
and then it loads the
localized versions at runtime.
And Java Client is really
designed for the intranet.
It's not the technology you should use
on high-traffic internet sites because
it takes a long time to start applets
when they have to download classes.
Or at least you have to
install a client start program,
and then having an installation
process always means that you
can't use it in the internet.
So Direct to Java Client makes developing
Java Client applications really easy.
It's actually so easy that we,
web object engineers,
often compare it to instant coffee,
for which you just
have to add some water,
as you know.
Now, in our world,
we don't create instant coffee.
We create instant applications.
And instead of water,
you just have to add a EU model.
But I promise you,
you can create Java Client
applications much faster than
you can drink your coffee.
So Direct to Java Client is an
infrastructure that is designed to help
you to develop Java Client applications.
It does so by providing you a
lot of predefined application
functionality you can make use of.
And it also does so by relieving
you from the burden to create user
interfaces by hand in Interface Build.
Instead, it generates user interfaces
dynamically based on information
it finds in your EU models.
That saves you a lot
of time and also money,
and we think it's ideal
for prototyping purposes.
But we know that the default
application that you can generate
by just analyzing the EU model will
probably not be the application
you want to deploy to your users.
In fact,
we think we know that we will hardly
ever need the application in a way
that you can just ship it to your user.
So that's why we designed Direct to
Java Client to be very extensible.
It's very easy for you to plug
in your own customizations.
And we offer you a lot of
techniques you can use to
customize the default application.
And in this session I want
to show you those techniques.
So we have a lot of
topics I want to cover.
First of all I want to show
you how to create Direct to
Java Client applications.
I want to walk you through the
default applications so that
you know what the predefined
functionality is that we provide.
I want to introduce you to the
architecture that is used for
Direct to Java Client applications.
I want to talk about
controllers and the rule system.
You will find out what that is.
And I want to focus a
lot on customizations.
So how can you customize
the default application.
And in the end I want to give you
a few good reasons why you should
really use Direct to Java Client.
I really want to burn that in your brain.
So first of all I'd like to ask
Ron Luu-Saang to come up on stage.
and give you a demo of how to create
a direct to Java Client application.
So we could switch to the demo machine.
Thank you.
I get so many demos here,
I have to use a script now.
So this time we want to use a
little more complex new models.
This morning we used a relatively
simple education model.
It just grouped around a person.
This time we use our movies and rentals
models that come with WebObjects 5.
So there are two models
that work together.
It has a movies database and
there's some kind of a rental store
information based on top of that.
So those are the two models.
And Ron's just going to Project Builder,
creates a new project.
Choose the right project type.
It's a Direct to Java Client application.
Give it a name.
And this time, we had two frameworks,
the one that we used this morning,
Java Client Class Loader,
which makes our demos very easy,
and the Java Client
Business Logic framework,
which contains our two models,
the movies and the rentals model.
You will actually find that in
all the exams with Objects 5.
So those are the two models.
The assistant displays the ones
that it found in the frameworks.
And that's it.
Just save, build,
and launch the project now.
The interesting piece about
this project is that there
are no client-side components.
There's no interface file defined.
There are no classes for the
client-side because everything is
generated dynamically on the fly.
So in the meantime,
the project was compiled
and starting right now.
And this is our Java Client launcher
that connects to the server.
So this is the UI that you get
just without doing any programming.
This is the default application.
So we see a subset of the
entities displayed here.
Those are the most important
entities of the model-- studio,
talent, movies.
And for every entity,
we have a query interface
where we can enter qualifiers.
So just searching for
some studios right now.
And then he's switching back to movies,
and we can search there as well.
Now he's searching for all
movies with the title M.
We can also append queries.
So we just appended to the
previous search result all the
movies that start with an S.
And now we're going to take
some details of this movie.
So we see the information about the
movie itself at the top of the window.
There's the studio.
And then in the tab view,
we have a display of all
the various relationships.
And if you want,
you can get more information
about the talents there just
by pressing the Open button.
So just leave it like that.
And maybe you can close
that window again.
And then as last step,
let's select the studio.
So if you want to assign a
new studio to this movie,
press on the Select button.
We get a mode of dialogue where
we can search for studios.
And then just select any.
It's that easy.
So thank you, Ron.
If you could switch back to the slides.
So as you can see,
it's fairly easy to create
relatively complex applications.
It just took a few seconds
to run through the assistant,
and it already generated us a fairly
user-friendly application that
you can use to edit and display
all the data in your database.
Let's take a look at the
architecture of the application.
This is the diagram from this morning.
So this is a normal
Java Client architecture.
If you've missed the
session this morning,
don't worry.
The only thing that is important
to take away from here is
that in Direct to Java Client,
we add components to both the
client and the server side.
On the client side,
we add this layer called EU generation.
And EU generation is responsible
to initialize the dynamic user
interface generation and just make
sure that the application still
does something sensible even if you
don't give it any user interface.
And on the server side,
the layer has a component that analyzes
the EU model and that basically tells
the client how the UI should look.
And this server side component of
EU generation is based on the same
technology that we use for Direct to Web.
I will talk a little bit about
the rule system in this session.
If you want to get more
information about it,
please come to session number 612.
That's tomorrow, Direct to Web.
And my colleague, Miguel,
will talk about the rule
system much more then.
So let's take a look at the client.
In Direct to Java Client,
on the client side,
everything is done with controllers.
You can consider controllers to be the
glue between the user interface and
the structure of EUF objects that is
necessary to display and edit your data.
That sounds a little bit like
the EU associations that we
got to know this morning,
but controllers are actually much more.
They don't only register for some events
and send some strings back and forth.
They actually know how to create
and lay out a user interface that
is appropriate to edit your data.
And they also know how to create
the EUF objects that are necessary,
so editing contexts, display groups,
associations.
Controllers know how to create all that.
And on top of that,
they usually implement a fairly
complex piece of application logic.
So as I said,
basically the whole application
in Direct to Java Client is
implemented in terms of controllers.
And you can probably imagine
that for a complete application,
you need various types of controllers
to take care of different tasks.
So that all the controllers
can still work together nicely,
Direct to Java Client defines
one class called EUController,
and everything else is a
subclass of this one class.
So, the application is usually
distinguished into four categories.
Every application needs some kind
of an instance that takes care of
starting the application and manages
global parameters in the application,
like user defaults, document management,
stuff like that.
That's usually called
an application object,
and so Direct to Java Client
has an EUApplication object,
which happens to be a controller.
They are also just
purely UI-related tasks,
just switching some
views in the tab view,
just managing windows, stuff like that.
And those kind of controllers we
call just user interface controllers.
And then the most complex
controllers are what we call
the entity-level controllers.
Those are the ones that really
define the flow of your application.
They handle business logic on the
level of the business objects.
So they know how to query for objects,
they know how to display lists,
they know how to create
forms to edit the objects.
And the fourth level are the
property-level controllers,
which take care of your business logic
on the level of a single property.
So they create text fields, combo boxes,
simple pick lists, and those are the
property-level controllers.
Now controllers are
organized in a hierarchy.
And that is important because when
the user interface is generated,
it basically reflects the hierarchy
or the views that are generated
for the user interface reflect
the hierarchy of the controllers.
So when a controller creates
a view for the user interface,
that view is placed inside the
view of its supercontroller.
The best way to understand that, I think,
is to just look at it as an example.
So at the right side of the slide,
we have a fairly simple window
that has a toolbar at the top,
a single text field,
and then a tab view with a table,
and a plot summary, which is probably
something like a text area.
So the controller hierarchy necessary
to generate this window would look
like the one that I have on the slide.
So there would be a window
controller at the top.
There would be a toolbar controller
displaying all the actions that can
be performed inside this window.
You find a text field controller
and a tab view controller.
And since we have two
tabs in the tab view,
there are probably two subcontrollers,
a table view controller
and a text area controller.
And since we have two columns,
we also have two column controllers.
Actually, let me go back.
So what we know so far is
that the client is implemented
in the form of controllers.
But where do these controllers come from?
How do we tell the client what
kind of controllers to generate?
Let's first take a look
at how we tell the client.
Well,
Direct to Java Client uses an XML format.
And controllers,
the hierarchies of controllers,
are just described in XML.
And we define the typical text for
every controller type that we have.
We have a tag.
So for the controller
hierarchy of the slide before,
you can see there's a window controller,
there's a toolbar controller,
text for controllers.
And then they specify some labels
and have additional attributes.
So this is the way we tell the client.
But where do we generate this XML?
But I already told you that
the most important resource
for information to generate the
user interface is your EU model.
But the EU model is not something
you want to send to your client.
First of all, it opens all kinds of
security holes if you do that.
And second of all,
it's just a lot of data
that you need to send.
So a much better place for
that is the server side.
And this is where this rule
system comes into the game.
The rule system is the mechanism that
generates the information how the
client should look like and behave.
And I will talk about a few
details on the following slides,
but there are a few things I would
like you to know and keep in mind
before I even go into the details.
First of all, most rules are defined
in a fairly abstract way.
If you write rules,
they are usually independent of the
concrete EU model that you have.
They are not related to an
entity with a given name.
They are usually related,
or they are very often related,
to just entities with certain criteria.
So what that means is that rules
are fairly abstract and can be
applied to multiple applications,
to multiple models.
So the rule system is a very
convenient place for you to
define your own look and feel.
So by changing the rule system and
defining a set of rules that you can
apply to your whole application suite,
you can define your own
corporate look and feel.
all your client applications
that you create.
Also very important is that
the rule system is a very
convenient place for localization.
I'll talk about that a little more,
but keep this in mind.
And again,
it's based on the same technology
that Direct to Web is using.
You can consider the rule system to
basically be a question-answer mechanism.
Questions you can ask
the rule system are,
what kind of windows are available
in my client application?
Other questions are,
what kind of background color
should I use for my text fields?
Or should I actually use a text
field for this kind of property,
or should I use an image view?
Those are the questions you can ask.
Basically, everything that is defined
or everything that appears on
the client side is the answer,
is the response to the question
that you sent to the rule system.
And the answers to these questions are
given in the form of what we call rules.
Direct to Java Client defines
a set of default rules that
come with the framework,
the Direct to Java Client frameworks.
And it's very easy for you to
define your own custom rules.
Now in Direct to Java Client,
the client only asks fairly
high-level questions.
If you could go and ask the server
all the detailed questions--
what kind of color should I use,
what kind of widget-- but that
would be a lot of communication.
We don't want to do that.
So the client only asks the-- basically,
when it starts up, requests a certain set
of status information,
what kind of windows are available.
And then from there on,
it will only ask for detailed
descriptions of complete windows
so that we avoid too many round
trips between client and server.
The client will also not ask for all the
controller hierarchies at startup time.
That would take a long, long time.
So it only asks for the detailed
window descriptions when the window
actually appears on the screen,
so when the user activates the window.
So the client asks high-level questions
and only one window at a time.
And when it does ask for a window,
it provides a certain amount
of input to the rule system.
The first one is the question.
So what kind of window are
we actually interested in?
Is it a normal window?
Is it a modal dialog?
Is it actually just a
primitive controller,
which are just a little piece of the
UI that's independent of a window?
Those are the questions.
Also, what kind of task is the
user performing right now?
What kind of window do we have to create?
Is it a query window?
Is it a list window?
Is it a form?
The window is related
to one complete entity.
It will also pass that
entity to the rule system.
And then there are two
more things it passes.
It passes some platform information
and some language information.
The default rule system does not make
use of the platform and the language.
But it passes it anyway just
so that you can make use of it
if you want to do platform or
language specific customizations.
Let's take a look at all the objects
that work together to make this happen.
When the client starts up,
in Direct to Java Client we use
a special application class.
It's a subclass of this U application
that we use in the normal Java Client.
It's called UDynamicApplication and
it's responsible for initializing
the dynamic UI generation.
And its most important task is to
create the so-called UControllerFactory.
The controller factory is the object that
requests all the information from the
rule system and instantiates controllers.
So when we start up,
we will make some rule system
requests to the server and find out
what kind of windows are available,
what kind of action should
I provide to the user.
And the rule system on the
server side will then take a
look at two types of files.
First of all, the EU model.
This is the most important
resource for the rule system.
And then the so-called D2W model.
D2W models are the files
that store the rules.
And you can basically consider
it to be the UI model.
You have the EU model,
which describes your data.
It's the data model.
You have the D2W model
that describes your UI.
So the rule system will analyze all
these files and come up with an answer to
the question and send this back as XML.
Then the controller factory
uses this XML description,
which is kind of a
template for controllers,
to create the concrete
controller hierarchies.
And those know how to create the
user interface and the EUF objects
that are necessary to edit your data.
And then when the user works in the UI,
he or she might trigger some
action that actually requires
to open other types of windows.
So there's a controller that
registers for some events,
and when it has to open other windows,
this event will be basically
forwarded to the controller factory,
and then the controller factory will
make another round trip to the server,
request new XML, create new controllers,
which create new windows.
One of the strongest features of the
XML generation is that it's based
on the WebObjects component model.
So we generate XML, we use VoxML nodes,
which is just a Vox component.
We use dynamic elements like
VoxRepetitions or VoxConditionals.
And we use so-called D2W components,
which are special components
that connect to the rule system.
D2W components use a
so-called D2W context.
And the D2W context is an object in the
rule system that stores all the input
parameters that came from the client.
It's also the object that
basically manages the rules.
And it's the entry point
for you to fire rules,
to ask for the answers.
We call that firing rules.
So that's actually a very,
very strong feature because you
can use the complete dynamic
elements engine to generate XML.
Instead of generating dynamic HTML,
you now generate dynamic XML.
Direct to Java Client provides you
two tools you can use to change rules.
The first one is the Assistant.
We've already seen that this morning.
Actually, no, we didn't.
But I think we saw it
yesterday in one session.
The Assistant is a tool that runs inside
your client application and that you can
use for the basic customization tasks.
And if it gets more complicated,
you have to use a full development
tool running on the desktop.
It's called the Rule Editor.
And you have to use the Rule Editor for
all the advanced customization tasks.
For example, if you want to change the
startup sequence completely,
if you want to introduce login panels
before the query window appears,
stuff like that, then you would have to
go into the Rule Editor.
And I'd like to ask Ron to come up again.
And we would like to demonstrate the
assistant and the rule editor to you.
So if you could switch
to the demo machine.
We are connected to the same
server that we generated,
to the same application that
we generated in the first demo.
And if you're in development mode,
in the Tools menu,
you'll find an additional menu
item called the Assistant.
So this is the Assistant.
It has a-- there's a tab view for
different kind of information.
It displays the--
[Transcript missing]
This is the XML we used
for the query window.
It's easy for you to inspect and
see that the rules that you wrote
actually do the right thing.
So what did we want to do?
I think we wanted to go and
change a few of the properties.
So we'll start with the entities.
We first of all move the user
entity from the main entities.
The main entities are the ones
that appear in the query window.
So we don't want the user there.
We want to reorder it a little
bit so that studio appears first,
and then movie first,
and then studio and talent.
And then we just press on the
restart-- save the changes,
and we press on the restart button.
And as you can see,
now our application has
already changed a little bit.
The user disappeared.
We only have these six entities
left in the query window.
Now let's modify how we
can search for movies.
So instead of searching for
the title and the plot summary,
the voting.
Let's search for the title, the category,
the rating of the movie,
maybe the studio, and the revenue.
And before we apply these
changes directly to the UI,
let's go and look at
the studio query form.
So it's the name of the budget.
That sounds like just fine.
So let's go on and go to the talent.
So as you can see,
the Assistant follows you
in the UI and updates to the
place where you currently are.
So if you just want to search for
last name and first name there,
the reason why there's no control
for the folder is that Direct to
Java Client found out that the
folder is an NSData object.
It's an image,
and there's not really something
you can enter in the UI,
so it didn't even generate a text for it.
So let's just reorder that,
that the last name appears first,
and then save and
restart the application.
So now as you can see,
we have different set of query
properties for the movie.
Click on Talent also.
Okay, see last name is first now,
then first name.
And now I think it's the...
Last step,
we wanted to go into the rule editor.
And actually, yeah,
can you open that window?
Sorry.
So as you can see,
if you look at the plot summary,
it just uses a single text field there.
Let's say we want to customize that.
So instead of using a text field,
you use a larger text
area with the scroll bar.
You could do so in the Assistant by
going to the widget pane and
adjusting the parameters.
But we want to demonstrate
how to use the rule editor,
so we'll do it by hand in the window.
So why don't you quit
the client application.
Then in Project Builder,
there's this userd2wmodel file.
So we open that in rule editor.
So these are the rules that the
assistant already generated for us.
We're going to add a few to them.
So that's going to be a
little bit of typing for--
So as a starting point,
I think it's easier for you if you just,
yeah, run for the first one.
So rules uses a so-called user qualifier
that basically determines whether this
rule applies to the current environment.
And we just duplicated one of the rules
that was there already and just modified
it just because it's a little easier.
So as you can see,
we basically wrote a qualifier
that describes the plot summary
that applies to an entity with
the name plot summary for a form.
And we're looking for a
widget controller right now.
So we want to give the
answer to this question.
What kind of widget controller
should we use for the plot summary?
And our answer is simply
an EU text area control.
Just delete those three and
duplicate the first one again.
So just duplicate that one.
We want to modify a couple of
parameters for this single digit.
We already said it's a
new text area controller.
We also want to give it a minimum height.
We want it to be vertically resizable.
And we don't want it to use a label
component because this text area is the
only widget in this tab view anyway.
So we don't need a
special label for that.
So just save that.
And then we are recompiling
our application.
We are starting it again.
OK, Ron's just searching
for another movie again.
Opening that one.
And as you can see now,
instead of using a single text field,
we have a text area
that has a minimum size,
fully resizable.
OK, thank you, Ron.
So as you saw,
the rule editor is a little
more complicated to use.
That's why we have the Assistant.
The Assistant will help you with
the first tasks of customization.
You can select the entities you
want to see in the query window.
You can actually switch the widgets.
The same task that we just
performed in the rule editor
you could do in the Assistant.
It's much easier there.
But if you have very advanced
tasks of customization,
you can go to the rule editor.
And now I'd like to talk a
little bit about localization.
Because the localization scheme that
Cocoa and Java Client by default
use is that you have multiple
versions of your interface files,
one for the English one,
one with German labels.
But that's pretty inconvenient
and very hard to maintain because
if you want to make one change,
you have to change multiple Nib files.
And direct to Java Client,
everything is generated
dynamically anyway,
so also all the labels appearing in
the UI are generated dynamically.
So how can you use the rule
system to perform localization?
And the first thing you need
to know is that by default,
Java Client leads the
generation of the labels,
Direct to Java Client
leads the generation of the
labels just to the client.
The client just performs some kind
of beautification with entity names,
attribute names, relationship names.
That's how the labels appear.
If you want to change that,
you can actually use the rule system and
force the labels to be part of the XML.
So, as I already said before,
the client will pass some language and
platform information to the rule system.
The only thing you have to do
is you have to write a few rules
to return a localized label.
And where you get this
label from is up to you.
One suggestion could be you
could go into your EO model,
use the user dictionaries,
and then add a localized version
of every attribute and property
name or entity name to the user
dictionaries in your EO model.
And then your rule system
could actually access the user
dictionary in your EO models.
You could write one single
rule to determine the label,
but it's probably more convenient
for you if you write multiple ones,
one to beautify or to
look for entity labels,
one to look for property or
attribute and relationship labels.
But the advantage of this solution
is that you do it in one place.
You don't have to maintain
multiple files at the same time.
You have probably one string table,
or maybe it's part of the
EU model in the user dictionaries,
but just one single place where you have
to maintain the localization information.
You don't have to edit
multiple Nib files.
So the rule system is really
much faster to do localization
than if you do it by hand.
And I won't have time to
show you an example of this,
but if you go to session 612,
Direct to Web,
then actually Miguel has a concrete
example running a localized application.
Now I'd like to spend some time and
try to explain to you why the default
application looks like it does.
When Direct to Java Client starts,
it analyzes the EU model.
And the first step is to categorize
the entities in the model.
It distinguishes between
three categories.
The first one is the list
of the main entities.
Main entities represent the most
important objects in your model.
Those are the ones that
appear in the query window.
The second category are
the enumeration entities.
Enumeration entities are very similar
to main entities in the sense that
they represent a self-contained unit.
But they are very simple objects.
They only have very few attributes.
And they are usually used in pick lists.
So if you want to have a list of states,
a list of countries,
a list of continents,
maybe movie ratings,
those kind of things are represented
by what we call enumeration entities.
And everything else is what
we call dependent entities.
Dependent entities represent detailed
relationships of main entities.
Let's look at an example.
So this is a model.
We see a couple of entities
here grouped around talents and
movies and the relationships.
Actually, Direct to Java Client uses
the most important information
inside the model it finds.
It uses other relationships.
And if it looks at this model here,
it will probably find that there's
a talent and a talent photo entity.
And it will probably find that the talent
photo is owned by the talent entity.
It's dependent on the talent entity.
A talent photo cannot
exist without a talent.
So if we make the talent
photo a dependent entity and
the talent a main entity,
the same is true for movie roles.
Movie roles depend on talents.
They cannot exist without a talent.
So the first thing it finds is
there's a main entity talent
and two dependent entities,
talent photo and movie role.
As the rule system looks further,
if we find that there's also a
movie entity and plot summary and
voting also are dependent on movie.
So there's another main entity, movie,
and more dependent entities.
And rating matches the description of
an enumeration entity I gave you so far.
The rating is used
inside some pick lists.
They're referenced by a movie.
And the rating matches the description of
an enumeration entity I gave you so far.
The rating is used
inside some pick lists.
They're referenced by a movie.
And the rating matches the description of
an enumeration entity I gave you so far.
The rating is used
inside some pick lists.
They're referenced by a movie.
and so this is an enumeration entity.
The second step for the rule
system is to categorize properties.
And again, we use four categories.
First of all,
we use a list of query attributes.
So those are the-- or query properties.
Those are the properties we
use for searching for objects.
There are list properties.
Those are the ones that we use
if we display tables of objects.
And there are form properties,
which we use in all the input fields.
These are the properties we
generate input fields for if
you want to edit an object.
The fourth category is
the identify category,
and it's used whenever
you reference an object.
For example, in error messages,
or if you just want to
display quick information,
just a little bit of information
about a relationship,
we use the identify attributes.
When it has this information,
the rule system can determine
what windows are available
in the client application.
It obviously would have a query window.
If the model contains
enumeration entities,
it will also generate
an enumeration window.
For every main entity,
the rule system will create a form
window with the detailed user interfaces.
And also for the main entities,
it will create modal dialogs that
you can use to select objects
when you want to assign values.
So you could add modal dialogs
that you can use for selecting
the objects for the relationships.
The model dialogue that we saw in the
demo was that we selected a studio,
for example.
So both movie and studio
are main entities,
and we generated a model dialogue
for the studios to search for.
So this is the information that
the rule system has to determine
when the application starts.
And we then send this
information to the client.
And from there on,
the client will make explicit
round trips to get the detailed
information about every single window.
So that's the next step.
When the client asks for it,
we will determine the
concrete widget layout.
And just an example, for form windows,
the heuristics that we use are we
use rows and columns for attributes.
It depends on the number of
attributes that you have,
how many columns we choose.
Or the mandatory to one relationships
to main entities are displayed in boxes.
So if you remember the movie window,
it had a box for the studio.
Or the other relationships,
when the switch controller,
which just use the Tab view.
And keep in mind,
for all the enumeration entities,
the rule system generates
a simplified-- actually,
sorry, I forgot about that.
The reason why we distinguish between
main entities and enumeration entities
is that for enumeration entities,
we can create much
simpler user interfaces.
We don't need modal dialogs and
all this big user interface.
We can just create a combo box
or maybe a simple pick list.
So the rule system will find that
the reference and enumeration
entity and then perform windows
generate a simplified user interface,
typically combo boxes or pick lists.
Now I'd like to spend a little
more time on customization.
There are three levels of customization.
The first one we already got to know.
The tools for it are the
assistant and the rule editor.
The first level of customization means
you are working on the level of rules.
That has the advantage,
rules are fairly abstract.
They can be applied to
multiple models often.
And they are very simple
to maintain and to change.
The second level of customization
is what we call freezing.
Freezing means that you bypass the rule
system and you hard code the XML that's
supposed to be used by the client,
or you hard code interface files,
so the user interface layout,
into a text file for XML or into a
Nib file for the user interface files.
Freezing means that you start to
transition into traditional development,
where you hard code UIs,
or the behavior of the client.
The third level of customization
is where you actually really
back to traditional development.
You actually write source code.
The most common tasks are subclassing,
using subclasses of our controller
classes to change the default behavior.
Or if you don't like the
complete flow of the application,
you can programmatically change
the controller factory behavior,
which can give you a very
different flow to the application.
If you freeze XML,
you bypass the rule system.
You can decide whether
to use just static XML,
so we adjust the end result,
or you can mix the
XML with dynamic elements.
So you can use repetitions,
or conditionals,
or D2W components to still generate
parts of your user interface dynamically,
and just use an XML template to round it.
You can decide to freeze complete
windows or just little parts of it.
It's up to you.
And the more dynamic elements you use,
the more your XML becomes
a real template.
We have some kind of an XML template
that is responsible for this layout
and form that I described to you.
The attributes at the top, the columns,
the relationships, domain entities,
in boxes, the rest of the tab view.
You can change that completely by
using a different kind of template.
When you use frozen XML,
you have to register it
with the rule system.
The way to do that is
you just write a rule.
It's detailing the rule system.
Don't do the normal stuff.
Just use this XML to find an answer.
If you freeze interface files,
you bypass the rule system and even the
generation of the UI on the client side.
You basically tell the client exactly,
this is the UI you should generate.
That gives you full control over
every single pixel in your UI.
Again, you can choose to just freeze
a little part of your window,
or you can freeze the complete window.
If you only freeze parts of the window,
then you can make use of
so-called subcontroller areas.
If you freeze parts of the window,
that means that you will still
have some subcontrollers that
are dynamically generated.
Some pieces of your
window are still dynamic.
And subcontroller areas
are just empty views,
empty boxes you can place
in your interface file,
and then the still dynamically
generated controllers or the views of
those controllers go into this place.
So you can point the client
directly to where to place the
still dynamically generated UIs.
I will show that to you in a minute.
Again, if you freeze interface files,
like with Freezing XML,
you have to register
with the rule system,
so you have to write rules.
For interface files,
you probably have to write two rules.
First of all,
you have to tell the rule system
that there is an interface file.
And second of all,
you probably want to tell it
to suppress the generation
of additional subcontrollers.
If you don't do that,
the rule system will still generate all
the normal subcontrollers and use the
UI that comes from your interface file.
So you need two rules.
When you actually write code,
then you can do everything you want.
If you don't like what we are
doing in our applications,
you can change it.
There are so many things you can
do that I can't even list them,
but the most common tasks are you
can subclass controller classes to
support your own custom widgets.
If there's a widget that you
wrote yourself and you want
to have an association for it,
you can write a controller for it.
And that way you can easily get
it into the dynamic UI generation.
If you want a different layout mechanism,
if you don't like rows and columns,
you can write a controller that just lays
out these widgets in a different way.
If you want,
you can work with the qualifiers and
fetch specifications that we generate.
If you want to change the way we
fetch objects from the server,
you can do that in the controllers.
If you want to add
additional actions to a UI,
if you have the default
actions like save,
revert, undo, redo, all this stuff,
then subclass and controller
classes is a convenient way for
you to get that into your UI.
And I already mentioned that if you don't
like the flow of the application at all,
if you don't like query windows,
you don't like form windows,
you want to have one application
that uses just one big window
and is completely unusable,
you can do that.
And you do it with the
controller factory.
There are two ways you can do it.
You can either use your own
implementation of the controller factory,
so you can use a subclass,
or as an alternative,
we provide you with some
delegate methods you can use,
you can implement.
It depends on your needs whether
it's enough to use delegate or not.
So actually, we have a demo for that.
And although the slide says
that Ron is going to give it,
I'm going to give it myself because
there's so much clicking that
it would be hard to synchronize.
So if you could switch
to the demo machine.
I prepared a project that
I want to use to show you
some customization techniques.
Let's start the server now.
I use the typical Java Client launcher
to connect to my server process.
And what I did for this demo application,
I first of all used the assistant
to modify the main entities,
the integration entities.
I set some minimum sizes.
That's why the query window
already comes up with a nice size.
I modified the query
attributes of movies,
studios, customers, et cetera.
And I used some special
customization techniques like
freezing to modify the movie window.
So it's not pretty,
but it's highly visible what I did.
So this is a little different
than the window you saw before.
So first of all,
we regrouped the widgets at the top.
There's not a special box for studios,
right?
All the text fields are in one box now.
Also,
we use multiple columns in the middle,
but not for all the widgets.
There's some additional
You know, information for the user,
what happens if he or she
presses one of these buttons.
Actually, there's a new text field that
displays the number of roles.
It's the same for the directors.
And for the plot summary,
we changed the layout
pretty dramatically.
And also,
please note there's a little button here,
an additional action in the UI.
If I press on that one,
it's actually opening both talents.
All the talents that are playing a role
in this movie are opened automatically.
So let me show you what I had
to do to get this to work.
Project.
First about the server,
I didn't change anything.
Well, actually, there's a two.
But the standard classes
like application,
they didn't change.
The session didn't change.
There's still the main component.
There's my items file.
These are all the normal components
of the WebObjects application.
Then I grouped everything else that
is specific to the customization
in this additional group.
Let me show you the userd2w model file.
So these are the rules that
I wrote with the assistant.
As you can see,
I mostly changed property lists,
what to use for querying.
I set some minimum
sizes for some windows.
I determined whether I want to use
label components or change the resizing
behavior of some of the controllers.
I changed the type of controllers,
so in this case I used the
checkbox controller instead
of the normal text field.
I used the text area controller.
Those are all the things that
I can just do with the Assistant.
Then I also used some frozen
XML and some frozen interface files.
And as I described before,
I have to write some rules
to register those frozen
components with the rule system.
This first rule here
uses the key archive.
So this one, this is the rule that I use
to create and to register an
interface file with the rule system.
It's named plot summary form.
It's an interface file
for this piece of the UI.
I'll show that to you in a second.
And then for the same context,
I had to use this rule here.
I mentioned before that I need
two rules if I want to work
with frozen interface files.
It says generate subcontrollers false.
So I suppress all the generation
of subcontrollers because I have
everything in my interface file.
And this one is the rule that
I use to register frozen XML.
MovieForms is the name of a
component that contains my XML.
This is the rule that registers
it with the rule system.
So let me show you the
interface file first of all.
And while interface build is launching,
it should be fast enough.
So this is the interface file.
As you can see,
I was just interested in changing
the layout for this piece of the UI.
So all I have to do in my interface file
is specify the widgets that I need in
this particular view of the tab view.
and you know you can choose which pieces
you want to put in the interface file
and which ones you want to put in XML.
The movie form here is a component
This is the XML.
I started with the
XML from the Assistant.
I went to the Assistant,
went to this XML view,
and selected what the rule system
had already given me by default,
and then copied this into this whole
component and modified it by hand.
So as you can see,
I introduced this box controller,
and then these are the two columns for
the text field controllers that we saw.
And I also mixed that with other
dynamic-- or with other components.
So I have frozen XML or the static XML,
and I can mix that
with other web objects.
So the other VOOC components.
If we look at the VOT file,
you can see that I'm
using EU switch component,
which is another subclass
of D2W component.
And this is a way to plug
into the rule system again.
I created the template using some XML,
but some of the UI is still
generated by the rule system,
which means that I can still access
it and modify it with the assistive.
Also, as you can see,
to display the number
of roles and directors,
I used two components.
It actually turns out
that they are the same.
So I created a reusable
component called countDisplay.
It just has some other
WebOptics components in there.
It's a static label controller.
It's a text field controller.
And as you can see,
I'm just using voxml nodes to
specify the content of this.
So there's a voxml node for a component
controller which groups a label
controller and a text field controller.
And the last thing I want to point out
to you is to plug in my controller class.
I just specified it here in the XML.
I just gave it another class name.
So I'm using a form controller.
I'm using a special class name.
This class is here, and as you can see,
it's subclass is EO Form Controller.
This is the code I had to
write to open all the talents.
This method here registers an action,
which basically is responsible
for creating this button in the
UI at the top right of the window.
This is a method that determines whether
this button should be enabled or not.
And this is the concrete
implementation of the action.
So as you can see,
I'm just getting the editing context,
asking for the talents,
getting the global IDs,
and then I'm using the controller
factory to open the form
windows for these global IDs.
So that's all I had to
do to make this happen.
OK,
if you could switch back to the slides.
I still owe you a few reasons why
you should use Direct to Java Client.
And the most important one to
me is that you end up with a
much better development process.
If you start, you know, projects with the
traditional development,
you first of all have to
write some application logic,
you have to create some
user interface files,
and you know what?
They are all subject to change anyway,
because the first time you
show this to your customers,
they will change their mind.
It's always the same.
So with Direct to Java Client,
you can actually focus on
the business logic first.
You start with the database, your model,
and maybe implement business code.
You just created a default application,
and this default application
is already able to execute
your complete business logic.
So you can go and show
this to your customers.
They can try out the
business process with it.
If you want to show them a little
more how it will look like in the end,
you can go and customize with
the assistant or the rule editor.
Or if it's not good enough,
you can freeze some XML,
but it's piece by piece.
You only do what you need to do,
and you still focus on
your business logic.
It's really important.
And then just in the end,
when the customers say, okay,
this is the business process I want.
It's doing all the right things.
I just want a polished UI.
Then you go ahead and
fine-tune your application.
But the important message is really,
with Direct to Java Client,
you always have a working application
that you can use to execute
your complete business logic.
So the benefits are that, first of all,
it's very fast and efficient to develop
a Direct to Java Client because so many
pieces are done for you automatically.
It also allows you to react quickly
to requirement and so database
changes because a lot of the changes
in your business model are picked
up automatically by the rules.
You don't have to go and change
interface files for that.
It just happens automatically for you.
Since you use a lot of predefined
application functionality,
your testing time should also be reduced.
We already give you this functionality.
You don't have to write it again.
We did some testing with it.
Maintenance of Direct to
Java Client applications is easier
because it's mostly data driven.
You don't have to write a
lot of source code for it.
And maintaining and editing data files,
XML files,
is much easier and much less error
prone than writing source code.
And again,
you can focus on your business logic.
So before we go into
questions and answers,
I'd like to give you a few tips
for using Direct to Java Client.
The first one is try to
use it for every project.
Direct to Java Client is Java Client.
It's not different.
It's just a different way to start
a project and to maintain a project.
Prototyping is so much easier
and with the customization
techniques that we have,
freezing XML and
freezing interface files,
you can smoothly transition
into traditional development.
So the other piece is, the other tip is,
try to define reusable components.
You know, you're used to that
with WebObjects anyway.
Create frameworks, you know,
that contain common rules.
If you want to define your
corporate look and feel,
put it in a framework.
If you develop things like login panels,
reporting, put it in a framework.
You can use frameworks and reusable
code with Direct to Java Client as
you can do with any other application.
Also keep in mind that localization is so
much easier with Direct to Java Client.
And it might actually make your
deployment a little simpler.
The reason for that is that if you
want to upgrade your application,
if you want to fix a bug,
you can often do so on the server side,
because the rule system
lives on the server.
So by upgrading your server system,
you can fix bugs in your client side.
And that might reduce the need to
install upgrades on the client machines.
So Direct to Java Client
makes your life really easy.
You generate applications
dynamically based on information
you find in your model.
There's a lot of
predefined functionality.
You have powerful
customization techniques,
and it's a smooth transition
into traditional development.
And it's designed for extendability.
It's so easy for you to plug
in your own controller classes,
your own source code.
So before we go into Q&A,
I'd like to ask one of our
long-term WebObjects developers,
David from CodeFab,
to come up on stage and share
some of his experience as a
Direct to Java Client with you.
So in the last year or so,
we had the opportunity-- I'm
Bill Bumgarner with CodeFab.
We had the opportunity to do
a number of projects that used
either Direct to Java Client,
Java Client, or Direct to Web.
In this particular context,
they're really all kind of the same thing
because they all build on each other.
And the key thing is that it's real.
I mean, this is real technology.
This has led us to great
success stories in the field,
being able to deliver technologies
to our clients that work,
they work quickly,
and to be able to deliver
those things quickly.
One of the other changes we made
in the last year is we moved to
an extreme programming process.
One of the fundamental tenants
of that process is that you want
to deliver early and you want to
deliver iteratively and often.
What that means is that when
you're working with the client,
you want to hand them an
example of their data live,
of their business live,
as quickly as you can so that they
can start to interact with it,
so they can take ownership of it,
and so that they can start providing
you with feedback so you can customize
this stuff quickly to meet their needs.
And what we found with
these technologies,
because they're so centric to not
steering you in the direction of building
monolithic pages or monolithic user
interfaces that are very inflexible,
they're much more about building little
components and providing these rules that
drive the components to work together
to provide the ultimate solution,
that in that context of
iterative development,
we were able to work with the
clients to provide solutions for them
very quickly that met their needs.
And as their business changed,
as the project changed,
we were able to change with it.
One of the key things is
that as software developers,
we're experts in software development.
When we're working with a client,
and I mean in any market,
not just consulting services,
but shipping shrink wrap products,
even like Andreas at Apple,
ultimately his client is Apple.
When you're working in
that kind of a context,
you are the expert in the technology,
your client is the
expert in the business.
You want to work with them to
provide the best business solution.
If you were the expert in the business
and the expert in the technology,
why are you working with the
client in the first place?
Just take over the world yourself.
But that's not the case.
And these tools really provided
us to deliver to the client
these solutions very rapidly.
To give a specific set of examples,
we have a particular set of
interfaces where the client came to
us very late in the project cycle,
said, you know,
we really want to have custom date
editors throughout the user interface.
So we sat down,
built a little date editor widget,
and then tested it out in
one specific small context,
one very tiny piece of user interface,
turned around, went into the rule editor,
and said to the rule editor,
any entity that has a date
attribute where the date
attribute needs to be edited,
use this widget.
Suddenly our whole user interface
is using this new widget set.
I can't think of another
technology where we could do that.
So it's real.
Use it.
It's very cool.
Okay, the typical reminder,
the WebObjects lab is
open until 6:00 today.
Please vote for WebObjects'
best app server.
The additional sessions I recommend for
you to see are Direct to Web tomorrow.
Also,
there's an advanced Enterprise Objects
framework and an advanced
Java Client session tomorrow.
All of them in this room
and the typical contacts.